Create Blog “building-a-conversational-ai-flow-with-deepgram/index” (#454)
deepgram/web-next: content/blog/posts/building-a-conversational-ai-flow-with-deepgram/index.md

---
title: Building a Conversational AI Flow with Deepgram
description: Learn how to use endpointing and interim results to build a
  conversational AI flow.
date: 2022-09-23T17:38:18.493Z

> cover: https://res.cloudinary.com/deepgram/image/upload/v1661981433/blog/all-about-transcription-for-real-time-audio-streaming/all-about-real-time-audio-streaming-thumb-554x220-.png

Reviewer: is this the right graphic?

authors:

>   - kevin-lewis

Reviewer: as you already noted, this should change

category: tutorial
tags:
  - conversational-ai
  - endpointing

>   - interim-results

Reviewer: do we want "speech_final" as a tag as well?

---

> How do you know when someone is finished talking? Before I started working at Deepgram, I hadn’t thought about this question much. When having conversations in person, us humans can use all sorts of contextual cues, body language, and societal norms to figure out when someone has finished their thought and we can jump in with our own opinion. But as we’ve all seen over Zoom during the last few years, figuring out when someone is done talking is a lot harder to do virtually. It’s even harder when the listener isn’t human at all—and is a machine learning model transcribing speech!

Reviewer: > all—and

is there a style guide on dashes?

> isn’t

is there a style guide on back/front quotes? I always use agnostic quotes

Reviewer: haha then I am wrong - I hate stylized characters, if it doesn't have a key on the keyboard, I don't like it, but feel free to ignore then

> Business problems that need speech-to-text often also need an understanding of when a speaker has completed their thought. One common use case is building conversational AI bots that need to respond to a user’s queries. The bot needs to be careful both to not to cut the user off, and to respond in a timely enough manner that the conversation feels “real time”.

Reviewer: do we use "real time" or "real-time"

Deepgram’s real time speech-to-text service provides two mechanisms that can help build a conversational flow. One is interim results, and the other is endpointing. Together, the two can give you information about when a speaker has finished talking, and when your system should respond.

> Interim results send back transcription messages every few seconds. These messages will be marked with `is_final=false`. This indicates that Deepgram is still gathering more information about its transcription, and has not yet finalized its prediction for the results. Over a longer duration of time, Deepgram will finalize its transcription for these interim results and send back final messages marked with `is_final=true`.

Reviewer: > This indicates that Deepgram is still gathering more information about its transcription, and has not yet finalized its prediction for the results. Over a longer duration of time, Deepgram will finalize its transcription for these interim results and send back final messages marked with `is_final=true`.

this is tricky - Deepgram is not "gathering information about transcription" it is processing more and more audio, and Deepgram won't "finalize its transcription for [...] interim results" it will finalize its transcription prediction for some audio range of sufficiently long duration - I am not great at wording, but these explanations are more accurate

Reviewer 2: How about:

This indicates that Deepgram is still gathering more audio and the transcription results may change as additional context is given. Once Deepgram has collected enough audio to make the best possible prediction, it will finalize the prediction and send back a transcript marked with `is_final=true`.

> Endpointing sends back a message as soon as no speech is detected (the default is after 10ms of silence). These messages will be marked with `speech_final=true` and `is_final=true`. 

Reviewer: should we introduce the concept of endpointing? "In speech technology, endpointing refers to algorithms which detect when speech has stopped. Our endpointing algorithm ensures that we send back a message as soon as...."

Reviewer 2: That's a little more high level than the rest of the post, but if you think it's important, we can include it.

Reviewer: we mention "endpointing" many times, but never define it, at least having a link to some docs would work, but the statement "Endpointing sends back a message..." is inaccurate

The simplest way to determine when someone is done talking is based on silence. Endpointing can give you almost immediate feedback when silence is detected, which may be useful for applications that prioritize quick processing of results. Here’s a code example that uses your microphone and the Python package beepy to play a notification sound when Deepgram detects an endpoint.

To run the code, install beepy using `pip install beepy`. Then save the following code as `endpointing.py`. Turn your volume up so you’ll be able to hear the beep sound, and run the code:

`python endpointing.py  -k 'YOUR_DG_API_KEY'`

{ insert speech_final.py }

> Rather than responding immediately, many applications will want to wait for a few seconds after a speaker finishes. This is a simple and relatively effective way of deciding when someone is done talking. Especially in conversational AI, where users may be speaking for longer and occasionally pause mid-thought, waiting to respond for a few seconds can give the best results. A combination of endpointing and interim results can be used to determine when a desired amount of silence has passed.

Reviewer: I would start by blunting pointing out the limitations of endpointing alone: "As you may notice when using endpointing.py, Deepgram will detect that you have finished speaking as soon as possible, meaning that in a conversational flow, this logic can easily cut you off mid-sentence every time you make even a minor pause." <- not great wording, but gets to the point - show the flaw of the previous solution before moving on to the next one

also maybe:
```suggestion
Rather than responding immediately, many applications will want to wait for a few seconds after a speaker finishes talking. This can be especially effective in conversational AI, where users may be speaking for long durations and occasionally pause mid-thought - waiting a few seconds to respond may give the a more natural conversational flow. A combination of endpointing and interim results can be used to determine when a desired duration of silence has passed.
```

Reviewer: > the a more natural conversational flow

I am a master of github commit suggestions

Reviewer 2: Great! Will incorporate.

Reviewer 2: Great! Will incorporate.

Here’s a code example that uses your microphone and the Python package beepy to play a notification sound after the number of seconds defined in the `SILENCE_INTERVAL` on line 11 has passed. 

To run the code, install beepy using `pip install beepy`. Then save the following code as `silence_interval.py`. Turn your volume up so you’ll be able to hear the beep sound, and run the code:

`python silence_interval.py  -k 'YOUR_DG_API_KEY'`

> These two samples should give you an idea of how immediate different types of feedback feel, and how they can be incorporated into different types of real-time speech to text applications. After incorporating these into your application, you can have your downstream system decide how to best respond to the user's input. Happy building!

Reviewer: real time vs real-time

> After incorporating these into your application

something more like "After applying one of the strategies shown here in your application" ?

Reviewer 2: Will update!

Reviewer 2: Will update!

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a
s
d
f
a
s
d
f
```

Reviewer 2: Will remove lol thx

Reviewer 2: Will remove lol thx
